Bunny Phyo
Birth name	Pyae Phyo Paing
Born	9 July 1992 (age 26)
Yangon, Myanmar
Genres	
R&B, Hip hop
Occupation(s)	Singer-songwriter, actor
Years active	2008–present
Associated acts	Sai Sai Kham Leng, Ki Ki Kyaw Zaw

Bunny Phyoe is a Burmese singer, songwriter, and actor in Myanmar. He is best known for his R&B Music.He has had a great interest in music since he was young. When he was in Grade 5, he recomposed a song called Ta Yauk Htae from the album of Nga Ko Chit Mae Thu song by R Zarni, by adding some hip-hop lyrics. He participated in Myanmar Traditional and Cultural Performing Arts Competition in 2000 and 2012 respectively.

Once he had passed his matriculation exam, he started composing songs together with a band called Southern Born. Shortly after, he began distributing some self-made songs. At the time, it was popular to share the self-made songs online and his songs were shared online. Since then, he gained the first recognition from his fans. In 2009, he was first contacted by Htein Win, who was a member of Rock Star group. Since then he started working with mainstream artists. At the same time, he also sang a lot of songs, cooperating with Kiki Kyaw Zaw and sang together with artists from Frenzo Production of Sai Sai Kham Leng. In the same year, he started singing on the stage in Thadingyut Festival organized by Bo Bo Entertainment.[1] [self-published source] Since 2011, Bunny Phyoe started entertaining in Sai Sai Kham Leng's birthday show every year. In 2013, he featured in three songs of Sai Sai Kham Leng's Latest album, Date Date Kyel.[2] He has become popular due to A Lwan Pyay A Nan song included in Pyaw Sayar Gyi album. At the same time, Bunny Phyo started endeavoring to be able to produce and distribute a solo album. He launched his debut album Chit Tel Hote on 20 November 2011.[3] Chit Tel Hote video album was released on 19 December 2012. His second album called Lu Pyo Hlae Tay was released on 1 December 2013.

After that, his first digital mini album, My Little Birthday Treat was distributed via the internet.[4] In the following three months, a dual album called DUO was released together with his friend and singer Ki Ki Kyaw Zaw.[5] Lu Pyo Hlae Tay video album was released on 4 October 2015.[citation needed]

On November 20, 2016, the day on which the 5th anniversary of debut album, Chit Tel Hote, he released his 3rd studio album "Lucky." [6]

